README.rst, before:

.. image:: https://travis-ci.org/collective/plone.app.imagecropping.png?branch=master
    :target: http://travis-ci.org/collective/plone.app.imagecropping

.. image:: https://coveralls.io/repos/collective/plone.app.imagecropping/badge.png
    :target: https://coveralls.io/r/collective/plone.app.imagecropping

.. contents::


Why do I need this?
===================

Automatic cropping is already possible, `plone.app.imaging`_ does already
handle this via the ``direction`` parameter::

  <img tal:define="scales context/@@images"
       tal:replace="structure python: scales.tag('image',
                    width=1200, height=800, direction='down')"
       />

However it only crops from the top/center of the image, so in some ocasions
this is not what you want.

``plone.app.imagecropping`` allows you to select the cropping area manually
for each available image scale using the `JCrop editor`_

.. _`plone.app.imaging`: http://pypi.python.org/pypi/plone.app.imaging
.. _`JCrop editor`: http://deepliquid.com/content/Jcrop.html


How it works
============

There is a view @@croppingeditor available for every content type
implementing ``IImageCroppingMarker`` via an object action. There are specific
markers for Archetypes and Dexterity based types:

- ``plone.app.imagecropping.dx.IImageCroppingDX``
- ``plone.app.imagecropping.at.IImageCroppingAT``

The interfaces are implemented by default for ``Products.ATContentTypes``
(Plone 4.x) ``ATImage`` and ``ATNewsItem`` and Dexterity based
``plone.app.contenttypes`` (Plone 5 or Plone 4.x as addon) ``Image``.

There is also a behavior called ``Enable Image Cropping`` which can be applied
on custom content types containing at least one image.

The editor view shows at maximum three columns:

- Image fields column (only visible when more than one image field is available)
- Image scales column (only visible when more than one scale is available)
- Cropping editor column

The aspect ratio for the cropping area in JCrop editor is automatically set
to the image scale selected by the user.

.. image:: https://raw.github.com/collective/plone.app.imagecropping/master/docs/editor.png

The image stored for this scale gets replaced with the cropped and scaled version.
This way you can access them as you're used to. For example::

  <img tal:replace="structure context/@@images/image/mini" />

This also enables support for richtext editors such as TinyMCE to insert
cropped scales into a textfield.

In TinyMCE it will be possible to access the cropping editor directly
out of the image plugin right below the scale selection


Load editor as overlay
----------------------

The editor can also be loaded as an overlay anywhere. Just place a link to the
``@@croppingeditor`` url of an image (``<image_base_url>/@@croppingeditor``)
and add some javascript. For example::

    (function($) {
        $(function() {
            $("a[href$='@@croppingeditor']").prepOverlay({
                subtype:'ajax',
                formselector:'#coords',
                closeselector:"input[name='form.button.Cancel']"
            })

            $(document).bind("formOverlayLoadSuccess", function() {
                imagecropping = new ImageCropping();
                imagecropping.init_editor();
            })
        })
    })(jQuery);


Configuration
-------------

A Configlet is registered in ``Plone Site Setup``. There you can adjust the
maximum size of the jCrop Editor Image (``large_size``) and the minimum selectable
size of the cropped area (``min_size``).

You can also set those values in the profile of your (policy)product using
``plone.app.registry`` mechanism (file ``registry.xml``)::

  <registry>
    <records interface="plone.app.imagecropping.browser.settings.ISettings">
        <value key="large_size">500:500</value>
        <value key="min_size">10:10</value>
    </records>
  </registry>


Further Information
===================

History
-------

There has been a need for cropping for a long time and there are lots of addons around
that have different ways to achieve this.

There is `plip #10174`_ asking for adding image cropping to plone core
which recently got rejected by the FWT. The cropping functionality should go
into an addon first that also work for dexterity and can be pliped into core.

.. _`plip #10174`: http://dev.plone.org/plone/ticket/10174

This package aims to be THE cropping solution for plone that 'just works TM'.


Design decisions
----------------

* make this package as minimally invasive as possible

  - therefore we store the cropped image immediately, so plone.app.imaging
    traverser doesn't need to care about cropping

  - users can access cropped images the same way as the access scales
    (so it works in richtext editors too)

* support archetypes and dexterity content

* a cropped image gets stored instead of the scaled image.
  if you want back the uncropped image scale you'll need to remove the cropped version
  in the editor


Information about changes from version 0.1 to 1.0
-------------------------------------------------

The marker interface for archetypes changed from
``plone.app.imagecropping.interfaces.IImageCropping`` to
``plone.app.imagecropping.at.IImageCroppingAT``.

The marker interface for dexterity based types changed from
``plone.app.imagecropping.browser.scaling.interfaces.IImageCroppingScale`` to
``plone.app.imagecropping.dx.IImageCroppingDX``.

The generic base interface is now
``plone.app.imagecropping.interfaces.IImageCroppingMarker``.
Do not use it directly on your, but use the marker to bind view or other
adapters to image-cropping enabled types.


Possible extensions / changes for the future
--------------------------------------------

* allow to mark scales as `auto-croppable` in the plone.app.imaging controlpanel.
  this enables cropped scales w/o manually defining the cropping area
  but would require some changes in plone.app.imaging (extend traverser, change
  controlpanel)


* see also the `issue tracker <https://github.com/collective/plone.app.imagecropping/issues>`_

Commit message:

rethink autocropping behavior
override 'down' direction instead of introducing a new direction. this
is easier for integrators.

README.rst, after:

.. image:: https://travis-ci.org/collective/plone.app.imagecropping.png?branch=master
    :target: http://travis-ci.org/collective/plone.app.imagecropping

.. image:: https://coveralls.io/repos/collective/plone.app.imagecropping/badge.png
    :target: https://coveralls.io/r/collective/plone.app.imagecropping

.. contents::


Why do I need this?
===================

Automatic cropping is already possible, `plone.app.imaging`_ does already
handle this via the ``direction`` parameter::

  <img tal:define="scales context/@@images"
       tal:replace="structure python: scales.tag('image',
                    width=1200, height=800, direction='down')"
       />

However it only crops from the top/center of the image, so in some ocasions
this is not what you want.

``plone.app.imagecropping`` allows you to select the cropping area manually
for each available image scale using the `JCrop editor`_

.. _`plone.app.imaging`: http://pypi.python.org/pypi/plone.app.imaging
.. _`JCrop editor`: http://deepliquid.com/content/Jcrop.html


How it works
============

There is a view @@croppingeditor available for every content type
implementing ``IImageCroppingMarker`` via an object action. There are specific
markers for Archetypes and Dexterity based types:

- ``plone.app.imagecropping.dx.IImageCroppingDX``
- ``plone.app.imagecropping.at.IImageCroppingAT``

The interfaces are implemented by default for ``Products.ATContentTypes``
(Plone 4.x) ``ATImage`` and ``ATNewsItem`` and Dexterity based
``plone.app.contenttypes`` (Plone 5 or Plone 4.x as addon) ``Image``.

There is also a behavior called ``Enable Image Cropping`` which can be applied
on custom content types containing at least one image.

The editor view shows at maximum three columns:

- Image fields column (only visible when more than one image field is available)
- Image scales column (only visible when more than one scale is available)
- Cropping editor column

The aspect ratio for the cropping area in JCrop editor is automatically set
to the image scale selected by the user.

.. image:: https://raw.github.com/collective/plone.app.imagecropping/master/docs/editor.png

The image stored for this scale gets replaced with the cropped and scaled version.
This way you can access them as you're used to. For example::

  <img tal:replace="structure context/@@images/image/mini" />

This also enables support for richtext editors such as TinyMCE to insert
cropped scales into a textfield.

In TinyMCE it will be possible to access the cropping editor directly
out of the image plugin right below the scale selection


Automatic cropping behavior
---------------------------

You can use ``direction='down'`` for autocropped scales as usual.
This package overrides the direction and delivers the cropped scale if it is available.


Load editor as overlay
----------------------

The editor can also be loaded as an overlay anywhere. Just place a link to the
``@@croppingeditor`` url of an image (``<image_base_url>/@@croppingeditor``)
and add some javascript. For example::

    (function($) {
        $(function() {
            $("a[href$='@@croppingeditor']").prepOverlay({
                subtype:'ajax',
                formselector:'#coords',
                closeselector:"input[name='form.button.Cancel']"
            })

            $(document).bind("formOverlayLoadSuccess", function() {
                imagecropping = new ImageCropping();
                imagecropping.init_editor();
            })
        })
    })(jQuery);


Configuration
-------------

A Configlet is registered in ``Plone Site Setup``. There you can adjust the
maximum size of the jCrop Editor Image (``large_size``) and the minimum selectable
size of the cropped area (``min_size``).

You can also set those values in the profile of your (policy)product using
``plone.app.registry`` mechanism (file ``registry.xml``)::

  <registry>
    <records interface="plone.app.imagecropping.browser.settings.ISettings">
        <value key="large_size">500:500</value>
        <value key="min_size">10:10</value>
    </records>
  </registry>


Further Information
===================

History
-------

There has been a need for cropping for a long time and there are lots of addons around
that have different ways to achieve this.

There is `plip #10174`_ asking for adding image cropping to plone core
which recently got rejected by the FWT. The cropping functionality should go
into an addon first that also work for dexterity and can be pliped into core.

.. _`plip #10174`: http://dev.plone.org/plone/ticket/10174

This package aims to be THE cropping solution for plone that 'just works TM'.


Design decisions
----------------

* make this package as minimally invasive as possible

  - therefore we store the cropped image immediately, so plone.app.imaging
    traverser doesn't need to care about cropping

  - users can access cropped images the same way as the access scales
    (so it works in richtext editors too)

* support archetypes and dexterity content

* a cropped image gets stored instead of the scaled image.
  if you want back the uncropped image scale you'll need to remove the cropped version
  in the editor


Information about changes from version 0.1 to 1.0
-------------------------------------------------

The marker interface for archetypes changed from
``plone.app.imagecropping.interfaces.IImageCropping`` to
``plone.app.imagecropping.at.IImageCroppingAT``.

The marker interface for dexterity based types changed from
``plone.app.imagecropping.browser.scaling.interfaces.IImageCroppingScale`` to
``plone.app.imagecropping.dx.IImageCroppingDX``.

The generic base interface is now
``plone.app.imagecropping.interfaces.IImageCroppingMarker``.
Do not use it directly on your, but use the marker to bind view or other
adapters to image-cropping enabled types.


Possible extensions / changes for the future
--------------------------------------------

* allow to mark scales as `auto-croppable` in the plone.app.imaging controlpanel.
  this enables cropped scales w/o manually defining the cropping area
  but would require some changes in plone.app.imaging (extend traverser, change
  controlpanel)


* see also the `issue tracker <https://github.com/collective/plone.app.imagecropping/issues>`_
